PAGE 5
4
ECB
Working Paper Series No 1168
April 2010
Abstract
In this paper we analyse the pass-through of a commodity price shock along 
the food price chain in the euro area. Unlike the existing literature, which 
mainly focuses on food commodity prices quoted in international markets, we 
use a novel database that accounts for the role of the Common Agricultural 
Policy in the European Union. We model several departures from the linear 
pass-through benchmark and compare alternative specifications with 
aggregate and disaggregate food data. Overall, when the appropriate dataset 
and methodology are used, it is possible to identify a significant and long-
lasting food price pass-through. The results of our regressions are applied to 
the strong increase in food prices in the 2007-08 period; a simple 
decomposition exercise shows that commodity prices are the main 
determinant of the increase in producer and consumer prices, thus solving the 
pass-through puzzle highlighted in the existing literature for the euro area. 
Keywords: food commodity prices; inflation; non-linearities; pass-through. 
JEL classification: C32; C53; E3; Q17. 
PAGE 6
5
ECB
Working Paper Series No 1168
April 2010
Non-technical summary 
This paper analyses the transmission of commodity price shocks along the food price 
chain in the euro area. Conventional wisdom holds that increases in commodity 
prices are passed through, at least partially , to retail prices. Yet, formal statistical 
tests typically struggle to find a robust food price pass-through in the euro area. What 
explains this puzzle? One hypothesis is that the existing studies look at the wrong 
food commodity data: the international commodity prices that are at the heart of most 
empirical investigations are a poor approximation for the commodity cost pressures 
faced by euro area producers. This is because they do not account for the distortions 
induced by the Common Agricultural Policy in Europe. A second hypothesis is that 
these studies generally neglect that the pass-through may be non-linear and may 
depend on the sign, size and volatility of the impulse. These effects have been shown 
to matter for the transmission of oil price shocks to both real and nominal variables, 
but so far they have been neglected in the context of food prices. 
We investigate these hypotheses using a novel database of farm-gate and internal 
market prices of food commodities collected in the European Union. These prices 
take implicitly into account the presence of the Common Agricultural Policy in 
Europe. We also model several departures from the linear pass-through benchmark 
and compare alternative specifications with aggregate and disaggregate food data. 
Our investigation highlights a number of interesting results. Contrary to the existing 
literature, we find evidence of a statistically and economically significant food price 
pass-through in the euro area, provided that the Common Agricultural Policy is put 
into the picture. We also find that asymmetries and non-linearities are statistically 
and economically significant, and hence have to be accounted for in order to 
precisely measure the impact of a commodity price shock on consumer prices. A 
model-based decomposition of the factors driving the rise in food prices at the 
consumer level between 2006 and mid-2008 shows that commodity prices were a key 
determinant of the increase in food consumer prices, thus solving the pass-through 
puzzle highlighted in the literature. Finally, the disaggregate approach highlights 
important differences in the structure  of pass-through for the various food items, 
which are lost when aggregate indices are used. 
A few implications of our findings for the monitoring, modelling and forecasting of 
food prices in the euro area are worth mentioning. The Common Agricultural Policy 
plays an important role in the transmission mechanism of food price shocks in the 
euro area and the novel database adopted in this paper may provide valuable 
information for the assessment of near-term food price developments. Moreover, 
models of pass-through for the euro area should be preferably estimated at a 
disaggregated level and should ideally allow for non-linear pass-through. 
PAGE 15
14
ECB
Working Paper Series No 1168
April 2010
in particular, depicts two such food commodity indices, one based on EU internal 
market prices (FCI) and another using international commodity prices only (FCI 
international). It shows that between 1997 and 2005 international commodity prices 
have been significantly more volatile than EU internal market prices. During that 
period, commodity prices in international markets have been generally below CAP 
intervention prices, so that this period of relative tranquillity might be the reflex of 
the stabilisation effects of the CAP on internal market prices in the EU. However, as 
commodity prices in international markets progressively crossed EU intervention 
prices from 2006 onwards, the two series have drifted upwards in tandem, 
consistently with the idea that the CAP, by design, mainly provides a floor against 
price falls. 
[Insert Figure 2 about here] 
3. Methodology 
Many studies look at the price transmission mechanism in food commodity markets. 
The vast majority adopts structural models of mark-up pricing, where consumer 
prices are a function of a number of cost factors (unit labour cost, cost of energy, the 
exchange rate) including commodity prices, as well as indicators of the cyclical 
position of the economy (see Bloch et al, 2004 ). This approach has the benefit of 
allowing to model the determinants of retail prices, but the choice of explanatory 
factors is somewhat arbitrary. 
An alternative approach used by Furlong and Ingenito (1996), Krichene (2008), and 
Zoli (2009), among others, is to model the pass-through by means of VAR models.
15
This paper follows the latter approach. It considers an unrestricted vector 
autoregression model for the euro area and investigates the interaction between 
commodity prices, producer prices and consumer prices for the six food commodities 
mentioned in the previous section (cereal, meat, dairy, fats, coffee and sugar). It also 
considers an aggregate version of the model, were individual series are aggregated to 
form price indices. 
The reduced form VAR may be written as 
t i t
p
i
it y A k yH  
 
¦
1
 (1)
where ty  is a ( n × 1) vector of endogenous variables, k is the  ( n × 1) intercept 
vector, iA  is the ith (n × n) matrix of autoregressive coefficients for i = 1, 2, ..., p,
and tH is the ( n × 1) generalisation of a white noise process. 16 The vector of 
endogenous variables includes the first l og-differences of both producer prices ( ppit)
and consumer prices ( hicpt) of specific food items, as well as either the first log-
                                                                                                                                                                        
commodity prices, by contrast, we adopt “use-based” weights. These are derived from the structure of 
euro area domestic demand (domestic production plus imports minus exports) in the period 2004-06, 
and follow an experimental scheme envisaged by the European Central Bank, which is described in 
detail in the box entitled “Euro area non-energy commodity price indices compiled by the ECB” 
published in the December 2008 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. See: 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/mobu/mb200812en.pdf
.
15 A comprehensive review of the empirical methodologies employed in the literature is in Vavra and 
Goodwin (2005).
16 The system is identified using a Choleski decomposition and imposing that commodity prices (and 
their non-linear transformation, as we will discu ss later) come first in the ordering of innovations, 
followed by producer and consumer prices. This ordering corresponds to the pricing chain 
assumption.
PAGE 16
15
ECB
Working Paper Series No 1168
April 2010
differences of the corresponding commodity price (ct) in the linear specification or its 
non-linear transformations, as detailed below. 
The non-linear specifications of commodity prices considered in this paper are the 
following: a) asymmetric specification, in which increases and decreases in the price 
of a commodity are considered as separate variables;
17 b) scaled specification, which 
takes the volatility of commodity prices into account; 18 c) net1 specification, where 
the relevant commodity price variable is characterized by the net amount by which 
these prices have gone up over the last year; 19 and d) net2 specification, which is a 
modification of the latter and considers two years instead of one. 
The asymmetric specification captures the type of non-linearity that occurs when a 
price shock is transmitted differently depending on the sign. In this specification, 
positive (

tc ) and negative (

tc ) rates of change of commodity price are separated as 
follows: 
otherwise
cifcc
tt
t
0
0
!
¯
®
­ 

otherwise
cifcc
tt
t
0
0

¯
®
­ 

The scaled specification captures the threshold effects, which occur when larger 
shocks bring about a different response than smaller shocks. The following AR(12)-
GARCH(1,1) representation of a specific food commodity price is considered: 
¸¸
¹
·
¨¨
©
§ 
   
     



ttt
ttt
tt t
t ttt
h cSCPI
h eh
h N I e
e ccc
^
1 2 1 1 0
1
12 121 1 0
/ , 0max
) , 0 ( .~
...
J J J
DDD
The net1 specification considers the variable NCPIt, which is defined as the amount 
by which the log of a specific commodity price in month t, cpt, exceeds the 
maximum value over the previous twelve months; and 0 otherwise. That is: 
^` 121 ,...,max, 0max  tttt pcpcpNCPI
                                                           
17 See Vavra and Goodwin (2005)  and references therein for an interpretation of the asymmetric 
specification. 
18 The scaled specification was developed by Lee et al (1995) in the context of the analysis of oil price 
impact on economic activity. The idea behind this specification is that oil price increases after a long 
period of price stability have more dramatic macroeconomic consequences than those that are mere 
corrections of oil price decreases during the previous quarter. We adapt this specification to our 
context considering that an increase in food commodity prices is likely to have a larger impact in a 
stable price environment than in an environment where price movements are frequent and erratic, 
given that price changes in a volatile environment are more likely to be quickly reversed. 
19 The net specification was proposed by Hamilton (1996) in the context of oil shock impacts. The 
idea behind this specification is that oil price movements must be novel (and thus potentially 
disturbing to producers and consumers) to have an impact. As such, oil price increases that simply 
reverse previous decreases have little or no effect. We adapt this specification to our context assuming 
that increases in food commodity prices cascade along the food price chain only if they are big enough 
to reverse any decrease observed in the previous quarters. 
PAGE 17
16
ECB
Working Paper Series No 1168
April 2010
The net2 specification considers the variable NCPI2t, which is defined as NCPIt,
considering 24 months instead of 12 months. 20 The net1 and the net2 specifications 
are slightly different ways to capture the state-dependent pass-through, which occurs 
when the transmission of a shock depends on particular features affecting the state of 
the economy. 
4. Results 
This section reports the main findings of the paper. On the basis of the Akaike 
Information Criterion (AIC) and Schwarz Bayesian Information Criterion (SC), 
reported in Table 2, we conclude that non-linearities matter for all food items, 
irrespective of the (international or EU internal) measure of commodity prices. 
[Insert Table 2 about here] 
Looking at the models with EU internal commodity prices in Panel A, the scaled 
specification is preferred for cereal, coffee, fats and meat; the net2 specification is 
preferred for dairy products and sugar. We recall that the scaled specification 
captures the idea that a shock in an envi ronment of stable prices is more easily 
recognized as such, and has a larger economic pass-through than if the same shock 
occurred in a more volatile environment. Likewise, the net2 specification assumes 
that prices are raised only when commodity prices cross some arbitrarily identified 
threshold, and are hardly reduced when commodity prices fall – an idea also 
incorporated in the asymmetric specification. Both specifications allow for the 
possibility that the pass-through of commodity price shocks may be different 
depending on the size and sign of the underlying shock. 
At the aggregate level, the net1 and net2 models outperform the scaled specification. 
We conjecture that this is because price uncertainty is often market-specific and, 
therefore, aggregate models may find it more difficult to capture this uncertainty 
properly. Along with other considerations, this result indicates that a disaggregated 
approach is to be preferred when dealing with non-linearities. 
These results are quite robust, and remain valid when international commodity prices 
are introduced (see Panel B in Table 2). 
In what follows, we will mainly look at pass-through patterns from EU internal 
market prices for the food commodities under the CAP and international prices for 
the commodities not subject to such intervention (coffee and sugar). When 
international commodity prices are used, it will be made clear in the text. 
4.1. Significance and speed of pass-through 
We measure the speed of pass-through as the number of months in which the impulse 
response function of producer and consumer prices to a commodity price shock is 
significantly different from zero, using 95% confidence bands. With only few 
exceptions (mostly in the transmission to producer prices) commodity price changes 
are generally found to significantly affect prices further down the food production 
chain. 
Table 3 reports the persistence (in number of months) of a commodity price shock on 
food producer prices. Beyond the variability across specifications, there are 
indications of different speeds of pass-through for different commodity shocks. The 
fastest pass-through is found on meat items, where the significant lags vary from a 
                                                           
20 We construct scaled, net1 and net2 specifications also for commodity price decreases (that is, 
SCPDt, NCPDt, and NCPD2t). However, in no case these are found to have a statistically significant 
impact on consumer prices, and hence they have been eliminated from the VAR models. 
PAGE 18
17
ECB
Working Paper Series No 1168
April 2010
contemporaneous effect to three months in the net1 and net2 models, where the 
transformed variable already incorporates some delay. Fats products have also a 
relatively fast pass-through, with significant lags of between 2 and 5 months, 
depending on the specification. The impulse response function for sugar products 
decreases quickly and is not significant at the 95% confidence level. For this item 
there is no systematic pass-through from commodity price shocks to producer prices. 
Shocks in cereal and coffee prices are found to have a protracted impact on food 
producer prices, with persistence ranging from 5 to 8 months in the various 
specifications. Finally, dairy products present the slowest pass-through, possibly as a 
consequence of the relatively long processing times of these products. 
Unsurprisingly, the aggregate regression using the aggregate Food Commodity Index 
(FCI) yields intermediate results, with persistence ranging between 6 and 7 months. 
[Insert Table 3 about here] 
The pass-through of a commodity price shock to food consumer prices reported in 
Table 4 takes as expected a longer time (the impulse responses are significant for up 
to 10 months). The relative speeds of pass-through for different commodity shocks 
are in line with those observed for PPI, with meat presenting the fastest pass-through, 
followed by fats, coffee, cereal and dairy products. We now observe an instantaneous 
pass-through for sugar, which however is not systematically significant across 
models. The aggregate regression using the FCI indicates that a change in food 
commodity prices can affect the corresponding components of HICP food for around 
eight to nine months. The long-ranging predictive power of EU internal food 
commodity prices, together with their extreme timeliness, highlights the importance 
of this dataset for forecasting and policymaking. 
[Insert Table 4 about here] 
These results strongly contrast with thos e obtained using the internationally traded 
commodity prices (not reported in the table).
21 When international commodity prices 
are used (for cereal, dairy, fats and meat), no significant pass-through to HICP food 
items is found, except for a quick pass-through (of 2 months) in the case of fats and a 
somewhat longer pass-through (of 7-8 months) in the case of dairy products. 
4.2. Size of pass-through 
The cumulated impulse responses to a unit shock in commodity prices provide a 
measure of the overall elasticities ac ross different model specifications and 
commodities.
22 These are shown in Tables 5 and 6, where each column reports the 
impact on a particular component of HICP and PPI food prices and the last column 
reports the weighted average of the impacts, using the weights reported on the top 
row of the table. The impact is measured as the cumulated impulse response to the 
shock over time, in this case expressed in quarters rather than months, for the sake of 
conciseness. 
Table 5 reports the pass-through patterns for various HICP food items. Panel A 
considers the linear case. A number of results stand out. First, there is a large 
dispersion of elasticities across different food items: the cumulated impact after 6 
                                                           
21 They are available from the authors upon request. 
22 We make all specifications comparable to each other by scaling down the impulse responses to 
commodity disturbances in the cases of SCPI (dividing by the sample mean of the standard deviation, 
ht), NCPI and NCPI2 (in both cases dividing by the ratio between standard deviations of growth rate 
of commodity price and such variables). 